My experiments with water consumption 

In this post I am going to share my 3 months long experiment to increase my
daily water consumption. I am not going to harp on the benefits of drinking
sufficient water everyday. That's a known fact. And Inspite of being aware of this fact my daily water intake was horribly low. A quick google search revealed that for a person of my height and weight should be taking at least 2.7 litres of water everyday.

I read in Tim Ferris' book "The four hour body", that if you can't measure
something, you can't control it. So the first step in designing this experiment
was measuring my water intake accurately. 4 glasses, 1 bottle, 5 times a day
are all inaccurate ways of measuring. 

Version 1 

I started with a small cup (200ml) and kept it next to my water bottle. Instead
of sipping water directly from the bottle, I would pour the water in the cup
and then drink it. I would log the amount in my mobile (in simple notes
application). It was obvious that this process was cumbersome (the extra steps
of pouring in cup and logging it in the notes in mobile) and would lead to even
lesser water consumption. This version of experiment needed serious
improvements. I had to improve on this version. However, now I had a fair idea
that my daily intake was less than 1 litre and it was a suffcient motivation to continue with the experiment.  

Version 2 

First step in improving the experiment design was to remove the extra step (pouring in a cup). So I measured the
size of my gulp/sip (15-35ml) and would just count the number of gulps I was
taking during each time. This simplified the process but again introduced
inaccuracy because of the variable sip size. Over a span of 10-12 intakes
during the day, I could potentially add up an error of 350-400 ml. So the two hurdles to remove was inaccuracy and easier logging process.

Version 3 

I found an app (iDrinkWater available on iOS) which simplified the logging
process quite a bit (not completely though). You should checkout this app, it's
very popular. However, the act of taking so many readings (10-12) in a single
day was harrowing. The second change that I brought in was to remove the extra step of pouring in the cup, by marking my drinking bottle with measurements on it (using a permanent marker). The smallest measurement size on my bottle is 20 ml (the small plastic measuring cups which come with the cough syrup bottles came handy in caliberation) 

Version 4

Now that I was drinking and logging the intake easily, I had to slowly increase
the consumption. I read somewhere that the purpose of setting a goal is to push
yourself. Since daily goals are difficult to chase, I set a goal of
consuming 1 litre/day averaged over a week. The iDrinkWater app is useful here
since you can set water consumption goals in it. At the end of the week I would
increase my target a little bit. I used a post-it slip also to keep a track of
daily consumption number in from of me (out of sight out of mind).

Based on this I was able to increase my water intake from 1 litre/day to 2.5
litre per day in 3 months. I am sharing my weekly average consumption figures
here. Now I have figured that I need to finish a 500 ml bottle of water in the
morning before leaving for office. I carry two 850ml bottles to office which I
finish before I reach home in the evening. This makes sure that I consume 2.2
litres by 7.30 pm. After that it's just having few more gulps before sleep and
I am done with my daily water target. Now I don't need the marked water bottle
or the app. The idea behind using those tools was to build the habit.


Few minor hacks worth mentioning
1. The bottles that I use has a flip top (Tupperware available on amazon) which can be opened with flick of your
thump. This is another step to make the process simpler. It's a hurdle if you have to remove and close the bottle cap by screwing and unscrewing the top.

2. I initially thought of buying a sports bottle which comes with measurement
marks, but they were too expensive and the marks were not sufficientlly small. For accuracy I needed the marks to be at 20 ml difference.

